Organization and administration
Governance

Weber Arch
Northwestern is privately owned and governed by an appointed Board of Trustees, which is composed of 70 members and, as of 2022, is chaired by Peter Barris '74.[63] The board delegates its power to an elected president who serves as the chief executive officer of the university.[64] Northwestern has had seventeen presidents in its history (excluding interim presidents). The current president, legal scholar Michael H. Schill, succeeded Morton O. Schapiro in fall 2022.[65] The president maintains a staff of vice presidents, directors, and other assistants for administrative, financial, faculty, and student matters.[66] Kathleen Haggerty assumed the role of provost for the university on September 1, 2020.[67]

Students are formally involved in the university's administration through the Associated Student Government, elected representatives of the undergraduate students, and the Graduate Student Association, which represents the university's graduate students.[68][69]

The admission requirements, degree requirements, courses of study, and disciplinary and degree recommendations for each of Northwestern's 12 schools are determined by the voting members of that school's faculty (assistant professor and above).[70]

Endowment
Northwestern maintains an endowment of $16.1 billion, the eighth-largest university endowment among private universities in the United States.[71] The endowment is sustained through donations and is maintained by investment advisers at the university's Investment Office.[72]

Sustainability

Students sailing along the shores of Northwestern University. The Chicago skyline can be seen from background.
In January 2009, the Green Power Partnership (sponsored by the EPA) listed Northwestern as one of the top 10 universities in the country in purchasing energy from renewable sources[citation needed] The university matches 74 million kilowatt-hours (kWh) of its annual energy use with Green-e Certified Renewable Energy Certificates (RECs). This green power commitment represents 30 percent of the university's total annual electricity use and places Northwestern in the EPA's Green Power Leadership Club. The Initiative for Sustainability and Energy at Northwestern (ISEN), supporting research, teaching, and outreach in these themes, was launched in 2008.[73]

Northwestern requires that all new buildings be LEED-certified. Silverman Hall on the Evanston campus was awarded Gold LEED Certification in 2010; Wieboldt Hall on the Chicago campus was awarded Gold LEED Certification in 2007, and the Ford Motor Company Engineering Design Center on the Evanston campus was awarded Silver LEED Certification in 2006. New construction and renovation projects will be designed to provide at least a 20% improvement over energy code requirements where feasible.[74] At the beginning of the 2008–09 academic year, the university also released the Evanston Campus Framework Plan, which outlines plans for future development of the university's Evanston campus. The plan not only emphasizes sustainable building construction but also focuses on reducing the energy costs of transportation by optimizing pedestrian and bicycle access.[75] Northwestern has had a comprehensive recycling program in place since 1990. The university recycles over 1,500 tons of waste, or 30% of all waste produced on campus, each year. All landscape waste at the university is composted.[73]